# Censo*rship in Kidz Bop Songs
### INFO 201 "Foundational Skills for Data Science" — Spring 2022

Authors: Ramya Arivazhagan | Josh Auvaa | Kaylyn Le | Betsaida Rodriguez

Link: Link to your Shiny App here



## Introduction

>>Kidz Bop can act as early exposure to popular music and culture for kids. Their goal is to take out any “adult” lyrics in order to make popular songs “kid-friendly”, so that kids may listen to the most popular songs of the day without their parents worrying about them being exposed to inappropriate content. While media and music for kids may be seen as too juvenile or too simple to be examined critically, seeing what exactly is censored and left uncensored in children’s music, like Kidz Bop, gives us insight into what words, topics, and even values are deemed appropriate for children. There are many questions that can be explored with the collected data, but we’ve chosen to focus on these ones:

>>1. Has music for kids gotten more or less censored over time?
2. What kinds of words experience the most censorship? Do certain categories of censored words get more censored than others? If so, why?
3. Is there a limit to how much Kidz Bop is willing to censor a song over omitting it from their album completely?
4. Does Kidz Bop censor implied language or only explicit language? To what extent?
5. How does censorship in Kidz Bop reflect values of parents (or those doing the censorship) over time?

>>The five values that we chose to summarize are the number of observation, the song with the most censored values, the category with the most censored values, the number of observations in the data set categorized as “profanity”, and the year with the most censored values. We found that there are 1,353 observations in our data set. The song “Lean On”, released by Major Lazer in 2015, has the most censored values. The category “profanity” has the most censored values overall with 353 instances of censorship. The year 2019 had the most censored values. These values help us get a better contextual idea of how to answer our research questions using this data set.

### Why is this important?
>>We expect that our analysis could create interesting discussions in music politics, including those of freedom of expression and exposure. By highlighting how Kidz Bop changes, or doesn’t change, as the culture surrounding profanity. While we expect to see changing trends over time, our analysis could also reveal the lack of progress in our society and could be used as an argument to push for change. We expect the drive to mostly be that of social change, but a political argument could also be made when discussing censorship of music. In the current political landscape we are seeing a prevalence of conservative ideology surrounding the ideal of “saving the children” and “doing it for the children” as a scapegoat for suppressing the rights of marginalized people and progressive expressions of self and identity. We hope to bring attention to the questionable quality of these censorship choices by highlighting how these ideals have spread to music and children’s media through Kidz Bop.

### Where did this data come from?
>>We found the data on The Pudding github. Link: https://github.com/the-pudding/data/blob/master/kidz-bop/KB_censored-lyrics.csv. This data was collected by Jan Diehm, an employee at Pudding who creates visual essays on interesting topics. The data was collected and generated by using the Genius API, Spotify API, the R language, and was manually cleaned/edited. This information was collected to show what words were censored in a certain set of Kidz Bop songs and see if there were any patterns.

### Limitations and Challenges
>>As previously mentioned, a limitation with our project comes with the fact that our dataset does not disclose the reasoning behind why certain words and phrases undergo censorship. Given the subjectivity of this practice, we may need to consider the context of the songs while making sense of our findings. This will affect our ability to analyze cultural attitudes around censorship in music specifically marketed for children through outlets like Kidz Bop. We will also have to keep in mind that we are analyzing only a sample of Kidz Bop songs and not their entire discography, thus the conclusions we draw may not be completely representative of their work. With that, our dataset also does not have too much variety in terms of numerical data. Because the majority of our columns contain categorical or identification data, we once again are limited in terms of what types of analysis and visualizations we can conduct and produce.




